---
title: Portal
description: Manage access, credit, and inspect agent logs or other stored data.
---

The [Portal](https://portal.recall.network/) is a web-based interface for interacting with Recall.
It lets you connect your wallet and inspect relevant information about your accounts, such as
bucket, token, and credit information. Additionally, you can create approvals to delegate access to
your account—which is particularly useful for delegating access to an agent.

<Steps>

<Step>

## Account setup

To get started, you'll need to have an account set up in your browser wallet. If you don't have an
existing private key, the `recall account create` [command](/tools/cli/account#create-an-account)
can generate one for you, locally.

</Step>

<Step>

## Get testnet tokens

Before interacting with the Portal, make sure you have some testnet tokens—follow the
[faucet](/intro/faucet) guide if you haven't already received some.

</Step>

<Step>

## Enter the Portal & connect

Then, head to the [Portal](https://portal.recall.network) to get started. Once you have an account
set up, you can connect it to the Portal by clicking the `Connect Wallet` button in the top right
corner of the screen. Once connected, your wallet address will appear within the connect button, and
you'll see tabs on the top left that let you manage your account (credit, approvals, etc.) and
buckets (create, add objects, inspect, etc.).

![Connect Wallet](/img/portal/landing.png)

</Step>

<Step>

## Purchase credit

Navigate to the `Credit` tab. Here, you'll see your account information, including your token and
credit balance. Click the `Buy Credits` button, and enter the amount you'd like to purchase. This
will swap RECALL tokens for the allotment, defined in GB per month.

![Buy Credits](/img/portal/account.png)

Now that you have purchased credits, you should see your account information displayed, including
your token and credit balance. Tokens let you create buckets, while credits let you store data.

</Step>

<Step>

## Account approvals

Optionally, navigate to the `Approvals Granted` tab, click the `New Approval` button, and enter the
address to approve. You can also add limits around the number credits, virtual gas, and expiry.

<div className="flex flex-row items-center gap-4">

![New Approval](/img/portal/new-approval.png)

![Approval Info](/img/portal/approval-info.png)

</div>

This allows the specified address to access your accounts credits and gas.

</Step>

<Step>

## Create or inspect buckets

Navigate to the `Buckets` tab. Here, you'll see a list of existing buckets associated with your
account. If you don't have any, you can create one by clicking the `New Bucket` button, which should
pull up your connected wallet to execute a transaction.

<div className="flex flex-row items-center gap-4">

![Buckets](/img/portal/buckets.png)

![Create Bucket](/img/portal/create-bucket.png)

</div>

Each listed bucket will show its deployed contract address and any associated metadata (e.g.,
alias). If you click on into a bucket, you'll then see a list of all objects stored in it—and each
object has a dropdown that will display some highlights of the object's data.

![Bucket Info](/img/portal/bucket-objects.png)

</Step>

<Step>

## Create or interact with objects

On the bucket's objects page, click into any of the listed objects to access more functionality,
like the viewing the blob hash, TTL (expiry block), downloading the object, or deleting it.

<Callout type="warn">

Objects are stored on the Recall blockchain, and it natively stores the data publicly. You can
[learn more about data privacy and encryption](/sources/privacy), which aren't implemented in the
Portal at this time.

</Callout>

You can also click the `Add Object` button to create a new object. This will prompt you to enter a
name and optionally add metadata or alter the TTL (i.e., when the object will expire)—and once you
submit, it'll prompt your wallet to execute a transaction. Note that **every object has a default
TTL of 24 hours**.

<div className="flex flex-row items-center gap-4">

![Object Info](/img/portal/object-info.png)

![Add Object](/img/portal/add-object.png)

</div>

</Step>

</Steps>

## Next steps

The Portal is a great way to get started with Recall. From here, you can dive into any of the
[agent plugins](/agents/plugins) or [developer tools](/tools/cli), which allow you to interact with
Recall programmatically.
